July 26, looking out into the large green backyard at the Andersons' home and getting ready to talk about the 1930s and years after that.
Test your mic now, please.
All right.
I think I'm ready to talk about the 1930s.
As the Depression began to have its effects on the campus and your family, can you remember any examples of
those depression difficulties?
Yes.
One of the memories I have of the Depression is that people who were riding the rails, who were unemployed, would walk over to the faculty houses and ask for food.
And I can very distinctly remember people coming to our back door.
and they would be given a meal and then they'd go back to the tracks and ride the rails to wherever they were going.
These were, of course, unemployed people.
Describe these.
I presume they were male.
Yes, they were men in their 20s and 30s, and maybe not well-shaven and so forth, and obviously tough circumstances.
Anglo?
Yes, yes.
Did they come to the front door?
Came to the back door.
What would they normally say?
Well, they would ask for food, and I can recall one,
spoke very sharply to our maid, and my dad told him to leave.
But the others were, of course, given food.
This man was very disrespectful of Ruby.
Was there usually an offer of work?
Not that I recall, no, no.
Do you remember the Depression's effect on your family much?
Well, most of the families on the campus were not severely affected.
In the athletic department, the salaries were reduced, I think, by 25 percent during that time.
But this, of course, did not cause people to not be able to do basic things.
And from the viewpoint of a child, we were really not affected by it very much.
And it was the fact that growing up on the campus was really a very positive event for a child.
And maybe it's one reason I came back here to practice in my memories of my growing up here.
We went to school on the campus, which meant two blocks to school.
As I probably mentioned already, in the summer we went and swam in the college pool.
My particular neighborhood was almost all young boys as far as the children were concerned, Mary Leland being the only girl, and the two Gammon boys next to us on the other side.
Leland's on the south of our house, Tom and Mary.
Buddy Williams in the house behind us and his older daughter Jane Ann.
The Knox Walkers had two boys who lived across the street from the Williams, and the Boltons lived on the corner.
We lived on Houston Street, and they lived on the street just east of Houston in parallel to it.
In the summers, Bill Eccles, their grandson, lived with them, stayed with them.
And also during World War II when his father was overseas, the Eccles lived with the Bolton.
So Bill was very much a part of our neighborhood.
In fact, he was my freshman roommate in college.
But we had a lot to do as youngsters.
There were hedges and there were plenty of places to play chase and to
have our acorn fights.
And as I mentioned, I think, earlier, that Gunnar Gadman invented a so-called firecracker cannon that we used on one occasion I've already talked about.
As we grew a little older, we played touch football.
on the grounds of the block that Guyon Hall was on.
Of course, Guyon Hall also was inside the site of the movies that were shown on campus.
Everything was close by and there was a lot to do.
What were those movies, what were some of the movies that you most specially remember?
You know, I don't know that I can isolate or pick out one.
On weekends, we would be taken to the Dixie Theater.
This is when we were 7, 8, 9, 10.
to a cowboy movie.
And I think Buck Jones was in his heyday at that point.
This was a little after Tom Mix and a little before Roy Rogers, not Roy Rogers, but the one before Roy Rogers and after Buck Jones.
He was just beginning to enter the picture.
And my brother, I guess,
achieved some degree of fame on one occasion when the cowboy and his girlfriend were having a moment of conversation.
It was very quiet for a moment in the theater.
Wally said, more shooting and less loving.
And since there was no other voice or noise in the theater at that time, he realized that he was sort of the center of everybody's attention.
So he crept down in his chair, sort of scooted down.
Now that was a matinee.
Yes, this afternoon.
And would your mother take you down there?
One of the mothers would take us.
Mother often did.
And so, and the audience would largely be children.
Yes.
And for the cowboy movies, mainly little boys, which meant that in our particular case, since our neighborhood was mainly boys, all the little kids went with us.
Did you all wander over to the railroad station near the campus very often?
Not so much as little children.
Of course, the railroad station was, if someone were coming into town, and my parents were picking them up, we'd be there.
And during the war, World War II, when we were older, of course, my dad was stationed at Fort Sill, and he used to come in on the train every two or three weekends.
But for some people, I'm not talking about children, but adults, just going to the station to see the train coming in was sort of quite an event.
And then the creamery was just west of the station, so you could go and buy some ice cream, too, if it were earlier in the day.
I think I've already mentioned that after we call it the new administration building was installed in about 1935, that was a favorite location to ride our bicycles over to and ride around the sidewalks and the gardens in front.
Did you see Aggies hitchhiking in the 30s?
Yes, that was a common practice.
Where did they do that?
Their main point, in fact the point really was, at least for north and south travel, was on the east side of the campus where the road in front of the new administration building intersected Highway 6, which is now Texas Avenue.
And I can remember this very well, too, when I was a student.
You know, there might be 75 or 100 people lined up, and you moved up the line depending on your position related to how long you'd been there.
And there was one line, and so there was nobody jostling to get ahead or anything of that sort.
class rank and or year of class didn't matter.
Not for that.
Did you ever?
For everything else, yes, but not for that.
I have not yet encountered any negative stories about hitchhiking.
Do you remember anybody ever having something happen?
No, no, I don't remember.
any accident or injuries or any assaults or anything of that sort.
And many cars picked people up.
It wasn't just the occasional car either.
That's what I've heard.
Yes.
And that quite often would pick up more than one so that the first person in line might then have two or three join him.
They were going the same direction, yeah.
All right.
And this worked all over the state, didn't it, with Aggies?
Yes.
My dad once picked up a young man who turned out was a French artillery lieutenant who had taken his leave time to come to this country and see the United States.
And so the young fellow got in the car.
Then Dad mentioned that he had been in France as an artilleryman in the war and was a colonel at the time they were talking.
We had a farm south of Navasota.
Dad was taking down some natural fertilizer to put around some oak trees he had planted.
And so he had a trailer behind the car, and so when the lieutenant heard Dad say that he was an artillery colonel, he looked around and pointed to the trailer with the manure and said, with that?
Presumably a French artillery colonel would not have had that.
At what point did, were you aware, and other youngsters your age, at what point were you aware of the world events that might involve you and your family in the United States?
Well, probably my first introduction to that was one of our neighbors in the first house, Mr. Marburger, who obviously was of German descent.
And he would come over and talk to Dad, even when we moved to our second location.
And he was concerned about Russia.
And, of course, I think that's true of the Germans.
They've always had this either feeling they wanted to take over Russia or the lands, extensive lands, or were just fearful of the Russians finally putting their act together.
I think probably I didn't know I can remember the newsreels and the Chamberlain going to Munich regarding Czechoslovakia and that sort of thing.
But I don't think I really realized the import of that, but I can remember those things.
And then, of course, when the war came, I actually put together a scrapbook, a World War II scrapbook, and stayed very much in contact with it through Life magazine pictures and so forth.
Where were you when you heard the December 7th news?
When President Roosevelt spoke, it was during the school week, and our superintendent actually arranged the PA systems of all rooms.
Of course, I was not in high school at that time.
still in junior high, that his talk to Congress was carried over the PA system.
And that was an extremely sobering moment, even for a child.
And, of course, I was young enough so that it wasn't until a few years later that people I knew, you know, closely were going into the service.
And by the time I finished in high school in 1946,
The war was all but over at that point.
When did the A&M student body begin to leave in large numbers?
Did they get called away?
Yes.
In 1942, A&M had actually had a rather meteoric increase in enrollment in the early 1920s.
I think it was like 1500 or maybe up to 2000.
middle 30s, it was 3,500, and then all of a sudden, by about 1941, it was over 6,000.
And some of this might have been due to the fact that people realized the war was coming and maybe there was some advice to go to a school that had military training.
But the class of 43, I think, was
either graduated early or given their commissions early without graduating in 1942, as I recall.
And of course, at that point, the enrollment at A&M markedly decreased, and it was under 2000 during most of the later years of the war.
And faculty members began to be activated?
Yes.
My father went on active duty in 1942, and D.W.
Williams went on active duty probably about the same time.
And he was head of the animal science department at that time, and J.T.L.
McNew, Sr.,
Civil engineering head on active duty, all of them, same time frame, and many others, too, I didn't know so well.
Now, you faculty families
When the man of the house was called away, did you all remain on the campus in the faculty residence?
Well, now this was, see, 1942.
Now most, literally everyone had moved off by 1940 or very early 41, but 40 was really the transition time, yeah.
And of course, the Victory Gardens, everyone had at that point to provide food, and there was gas rationing.
four gallons a month or something like that per car, unless there was a special need involved for the owner's use.
And there was some rationing of food.
I don't remember in detail what, but sugar maybe or something.
Now, your dad had, he's called on active duty at what rank?
As a colonel.
As a colonel in the artillery?
Yes.
Describe his wartime experience as well.
His experience, he went to Fort Sill and he was one of eight or nine full colonels who were called, were allowed.
They were, I know the telegram the dad received said that he
if he chose, could go on active duty.
And apparently, with that rank, it was more of a choice than just a requirement.
In fact, I think the Army would have been probably just as happy if many of the senior officers had not gone on active duty because they had enough of them.
But he chose to go on active duty, and he spent time at Fort Sill.
and going through two schools of artillery there, which was basically sort of an update on the change in artillery methods between the two World Wars.
And then he spent time at Fort Bragg
training, and he spent time also with the 30th Division in Tennessee.
And he did not go overseas in the war.
And then, of course, came back to NM and to the physical education department.
When does he get back?
In 45, 44, 44, yeah.
44?
Late 44, yeah.
Okay.
And so you, your mom and children are here.
And I'm assuming you had a number of neighbors, exactly the same situation where?
Yes.
You know, I can remember my dad was a little older than the average.
D.W.
Williams was probably a little younger, and Lamar McNew was younger than that.
But most of the people who went on active duty were in their 20s and 30s on the faculty.
I think, was it Mr. Whitley or one of, I don't know if he went on the, if he was on the faculty before the war, but he came back on the faculty.
He won a congressional medal.
Yeah.
But the younger people, I don't remember.
just exactly how many, because I was more in contact with the friends of my parents.
But I can remember at one party social event that one of the young wives of the faculty was just absolutely distraught, you know, her husband going overseas.
And it was probably very tough on those people out of age range.
Now, there were many
training units sent here by Army and Army Air Corps, and I presume, were there Navy units also?
I think there were, yes, there was a Navy unit.
In fact, one of the physicians assigned to it stayed here in practice.
Where did they, did they live?
They had the Army Student Training, ASTP.
Did they live on campus, those students, in dormitories?
Yes.
Uh-huh, yeah.
Of course, and then with its massive amount of space for dormitories, could accommodate them during the war because there were not many students here.
And there was a building, a large white frame structure
one story that had been built for the AAA, which was one of the Roosevelt New Deal organizations, and that during the war was used as sort of the educational center for at least some of those.
of the Navy at least, I think.
And it was located more or less where the TV station on campus is now and in the parking lot just north of it.
It covered quite an extensive area.
Now, for you as a junior and then senior high student during the war years,
Did the, with all of these non-Texan, these different, did your routine change much of community life and what you did for fun and so forth?
Say that question one more time.
Well, with the coming of these active duty personnel, did they cause much of a change in the lifestyle on the campus?
No, they did not, no.
They fitted in.
Most of these were youngsters who were going to college, you know, or did with the government programs after the war, and they were selected because they were
And so, as far as the type of person, it saw no difference.
And of course, by that time, we were not living on the campus, so we didn't really interface with them that much.
And you didn't hear any bad stories about their off-campus conduct?
No.
Making trouble or anything?
Was there much change in the campus and the faculty and administrative leadership during the war?
Yes.
Dr. Walton, who had been president since the late 1920s, stepped down.
and actually in time became the postmaster.
And I think at that time it was enough of a time of change so that we were moving from sort of an agricultural
maybe to a little more technological, or at least more urban.
And he represented sort of the agricultural past.
And so there was a shift away, and he was getting into 62 or so.
And so there was a change at the president's level.
I'm really trying to think of exactly the sequence of presidents at that time.
There was more than one in a relatively short period, but Kim Gilchrist was president, and Dean Bolton served for a time as president, and then Tom Harrington.
This would have been in the 1950s.
But basically, you saw sort of a shift from agriculture being the dominant school to engineering.
To engineering.
Now, for you as a bright young man in junior and senior high, what wartime events overseas touched your mind and or your heart?
In Pearl Harbor, you asked, what are some other events that you and your friends talked about a lot and you remember where you were when you heard the news?
Well, of course, D-Day, and I may be thinking of it in retrospect more than anything, but that would have been sort of, to me, the most pivotal day in the war.
I, of course, remember the surrender of the Japanese.
What about the death of the president?
Did that one?
Yes, it very much did, yes.
We had a high school party scheduled.
occurring at the time of his death.
And I think I was told about it at the time of the party, actually.
And yes, that was a very sobering event because for people my age, he had been the president of the United States as long as we could remember, you know.
I was at junior high football practice in the shower.
And a young man stuck his head in the door and giggled.
And we all said, hey, that's not funny.
Don't be joking about that.
And he said, no, that's true.
When I got home, I realized I put on my clothes without drying off.
And on the way home, we chatted about how do we get another president?
Since he's been president forever, how can we get another one?
And who will it be?
Now, President Roosevelt had been here once, hadn't he, to visit?
That's correct.
Do you remember that visit?
Yes.
It was 1937, and I remember it without seeing him very well.
I was in the hospital and recovering from pneumonia, and I very much wanted to see the president.
I was not allowed to, so my mother gave me an Azalea, and I thought that was the worst trade-off.
I mean, for not seeing the President.
But the story that Knox Walker has told, one of our neighborhood boys, who later was a member of the entomology department at Anne Hill.
He mentioned that Mother had left instructions with Ruby about how Wally was supposed to be attired for the occasion.
And then she went to the hospital to see me.
And so Wiley left with his white linen suit on, but he neglected to put his shoes on.
And so Knox tells the story of that as the president's car apparently rounded
turn in the track inside the stadium that Wiley ran forward, barefooted, and hopped up on the running board and, like says, shook hands with the press.
And I'm not so sure that was the case, but with his linen suit and bare feet.
It was a different era.
That's right.
A different era.
All right.
The war is over and you enter school in the summer or fall of 46?
I entered it in the fall of 46.
Was there ever any choice in your mind about where you would go to college?
No.
It wasn't really even considered, you know.
It wasn't that you had to go to A&M.
It's just that you just went to A&M, you know.
There was no question about it, you know, and no heart-rending decision or worry about it or anything.
It was just a... Where did you live your freshman year?
I lived in dormitory two.
What outfit?
F battery.
Dormitory 2 was about 50 yards from the site where the building was that I attended first grade.
But my room was, I believe, 222 or 221, and it happened to be across from the CQ room, which was sort of where the cadet officer on duty was located on weekends and so forth.
And I can remember, as a freshman, we were allowed out Saturday after classes were over.
but had to come in that evening.
And so I would come in and usually there was a poker game going on in the secure room.
And usually later in the evening, a freshman would be hauled in there.
So I would sort of sneak into my room as quietly as possible.
And then I would open the closet door and get behind my duffel bag and sort of leave about a half an inch or less crack in the door so I'd have a little oxygen to see what was happening.
That way, if they opened the door, they didn't see a freshman in the room.
And I'd do that till about midnight, and then by that time, things had slowed down, so you'd go to bed then.
Was there anything about the routine
of the life of a fish in 46 that surprised you, or did you have a fairly accurate understanding of what life of a freshman would be?
I don't know that I really understood totally what life as a freshman would be, because you had to experience it to really understand.
But I did know that more or less, sort of in general, what to expect a little bit, yeah.
And at that point, what was your academic goal?
I was a pre-med student.
So you?
Where did that ambition come from?
You know, I really don't know.
I decided I wanted to be a physician when I was 16.
And actually, what I had first thought about being a veterinarian, Dad's brother, younger brother, was a veterinarian.
I liked him.
And then I realized that I didn't know anything about animals or agriculture or anything of that sort.
So it sort of evolved into being a human doctor instead of a veterinarian.
At that point, what did you think
it took to get into medical school in terms of grades and achievement level?
When I was 16, I don't know that I thought about it so much in high school, but obviously when I reached college, it was very apparent that you had to do well academically.
And I actually was a distinguished student my first semester, which in the Cadet Corps was something.